
## 1.3: Cultural Relativism

Covers chapter 2, pages 21-23 from the textbook.

---

### Learning Objectives

* Define cultural relativism.
* Explain the Culture Differences Argument.
* Explain two reasons why the Cultural Differences Argument is unsound.
* Explain three objections to cultural relativism.

---

* **Cultural relativism** (also known as ethical or moral relativism) is a minority view among philosophers that there is no objective truth in ethics.
* Instead, cultural relativists believe that right and wrong are relative to different individuals or groups.

#### Implications of ethical relativism:

* No one can be mistaken at any given point in their ethical views. Choosing to holocaust an entire culture of people has no inherent moral diffence from choosing to donate a kidney.
	* This implication alone is often enough for people to refuse to accept ethical relativism as a worldview.
* If we accept moral relativism, we must also accept that Moral Progress cannot exist.
	* Moral Progress involves moving from a worse moral state to a better one. However, neither of these concepts have any meaning within the framework of ethical relativism.

#### Arguments for ethical relativism:

1. The Cultural Differences Argument
	* This argument stems from a desire to be more tolerant of other cultures.
	* However, the motivation for this argument itself is logically invalid - if ethical relativism is true, then cultural imperialism itself cannot be wrong.

	* The argument in standard form:
	```
	1. Different cultures have different moral codes.
	---
	2. Therefore moral right and wrong are not objective truths, instead they are determined by one's culture.
	```
	* However, the argument is invalid; Premise 1 does not imply the conclusion. Just because different cultures disagree on ethical issues, it does not mean there is no objective truth to them. People disagree on the existence of God, of Santa Claus, whether the Earth is flat or not, and so on. It does not mean that there's no objective truth to these facts.
	* It also contains a weak premise: it might be inaccurate to say that different cultures have different moral codes. Although they may disagree on specific ethical issues, there are some moral codes that all cultures necessarily must agree on. Namely, the moral codes required to sustain a culture (caring for the young and the pregnant, not wantonly killing vast swaths of one's own culture, etc). All cultures seem to have these in common.

2. A puzzlement about how a moral belief could possibly be true.
	* Another argument for ethical relativism is from those who say that ethical beliefs can't possibly be true. They can't be empirically measured like the force of gravity or the boiling point of water, so they're closer to opinions than true facts.
	* However, things can be rationally justified without being empirically justified (for example mathematical axioms).
	* Furthermore, unlike opinions, moral statements require logical justifications.
