
## 1.4: Utilitarianism

Covers pages 24-34 of the textbook.

---

### Learning Objectives

* define classical act utilitarianism and its three parts.
* apply classical act utilitarianism to various moral problems.
* explain objections to each part of classical act utilitarianism.
* consider and evaluate utilitarian responses to these objections.

---

#### Classical Act Utilitarianism

* **Utilitarianism** (also known as Classical Act Utilitarianism) is a normative ethical theory that seeks to maximize pleasure and minimize pain.
* It is composed of 3 distinct ideas:
	1. Consequentialism: the right act is determined entirely by its consequences.
	2. Hedonism: the sole intrinsic good is pleasure and the sole intrinsic bad is pain. There may be other things we consider good such as health, food, freedom, income, friends, etc., but hedonists argue that these are only good insofar as they lead to pleasure or avoidance of pain. These are **instrumentally good**, whereas pleasure is **intrinsically good**.
	3. Equal consideration: No one's good is considered more important than anyone else's.
* The **optimific** act is the one that does the most good and the least bad. Utilitarianism necessitates that you always choose the optimific act.
* This definition of utilitarianism means that it is *situational* - whether an act is right or wrong depends on the context.

#### Objections to Classical Act Utilitarianism

1. Against consequentialism:
	* It is too simple: the morality of an act depends on more than just the pleasure and pain it causes. For example, imagine a voyeur installs a camera in a locker room, that no one knows about. It causes no distress to the victims since they don't even realize it exists, and it brings pleasure to the voyeur. Utilitarianism not only condones this, but in fact it morally necessitates it.
	* It is difficult for us to understand the long-term consequences of our actions. We're often only able to consider the immediate moral implications of our actions and not their effects years or decades down the line. It's possible that acts that cause the greatest net pleasure now may in fact cause more net pain in the long-term.
		* Note: this doesn't actually disprove utilitarianism, it merely shows that it is impractical.
2. Against Hedonism:
	* Pleasure is not always intrinsically good, and other things may be intrinsically good besides pleasure.
		* For example, pleasures derived from violating the rights of others.
		* Another famous example is Robert Novick's Experience Machine - Imagine a machine is invented that allows the user to enter and have any simulated experience they desire. The machine keeps them alive, and while they're inside they don't realize that they're actually in a machine. Many would argue that even though this machine can maximize pleasure and minimize pain, there is something intrinsically worse about these pleasures because they don't actually exist.
3. Against Equal Consideration:
	* It isn't able to recognize the value of special relationships. Under equal consideration, we cannot value our friends and family over strangers - choosing to take your child to a movie is unethical when you could instead spend that time volunteering and donate the money you would've spend on movie tickets to charity instead.
	* It is too demanding. Utilitarianism also demands that you devote as much time as possible to maximizing good for others. This means no vacations, no personal hobbies, and you definitely can't spend your sunday afternoons in bed watching TV. All your free time and all your excess income must be devoted to the greater good.

#### Utilitarian Responses

* Some utilitarians agree that hedonism is flawed, and what is actually good is the satisfaction of people's preferences. Others endorse a list of intrinsic goods such as autonomy, knowledge, beauty, friendship, pleasure, etc.
* Some argue that exceptions to utilitarianism are highly exceptional circumstances that would never occur in real life.
* Refuting the claim that utilitarianism is too demanding, some argue that in actuality, if one were to try and devote every waking moment and spare dollar to maximizing good, they would burn out and give up entirely. Thus a more moderate and sustainable approach is actually more utilitarian.

#### Rule Utilitarianism

* One modification made in response to these criticisms is *rule utilitarianism*. 
* It states that:
	* The right thing to do is follow the best rule.
	* The best rule is the one that, if consistently followed, would lead to the greatest net good.
* Thus, given a choice between the rules "respect people's privacy" and "violate people's privacy", we should *always* follow the first rule, even if there are some cases where it would cause more net good to follow the second rule.
* Objecters argue that you could instead generate a rule "respect people's privacy, except when violating it leads to more net good." By the definition of rule utilitarianism, this is an even better rule. In this case, we can see that rule utilitarianism simply collapses back into classical act utilitarianism.
	*Rule utilitarians might argue that rules need to be more general and absolute. However, this approach generates rules like "never lie", which lack nuance.
